---
title: "Illuminated Betta Fish - Luminata 2022 "
excerpt: "Interactive Illuminated Betta Fish Sculpture at 2022 Luminata!"

categories:
  - Events
tags:
  - Events

---

We love [Fremont Arts Council](https://fremontartscouncil.org/).
They host a celebration for the changing of each season. For the Fall Equinox
we celebrate [Luminata](https://fremontartscouncil.org/luminata).

For Luminata 2022 Haus Anima created an
**Interactive Illuminated Betta Fish Sculpture**.

[Our complete Luminata 2022 photo album](https://photos.app.goo.gl/3jUfCPXMs2Rhnzkh6)

{% include video id="zknjNJiU0xM" provider="youtube" %}

### For Luminata 2022 Haus Anima created "Interactive Illuminated Betta Fish Sculpture"
---

This is a visual tour of our process

From
<a href="1_Fish_In_Fish.jpg">1_Fish_In_Fish.jpg</a>
To
<a href="240_celebration.jpg">240_celebration.jpg</a>

**BettaFish** is an interactive sculpture featuring touch sensors (on the music scales) that change the light pattern and ambient music.

Creating the Betta Fish took over a month of concentrated work. In three main phases - Frame, Electronics, Scales

Earl Frame Design and work

<a href="49_molding_prototype.jpg">49_molding_prototype.jpg</a>

Loren & Kalesta created the physical frame from over 300 feet of wire

<a href="50_prototyping.jpg">50_prototyping.jpg</a>
<a href="55_prototyping.jpg">55_prototyping.jpg</a>
<a href="56_prototyping.jpg">56_prototyping.jpg</a>

The tail was initially separate wire pieces but this turned out to be unstable so it was changed to 7 "loops" of wire.

<a href="57_prototyping.jpg">57_prototyping.jpg</a>

Final wire design

<a href="204_testing_electronics.jpg">204_testing_electronics.jpg</a>

We 3D printed a dozen prototype scale patterns and tested them to see which looked and felt the best
We were inspired by a hexagon dress we saw at the Pacific Science Center and copied their technique of printing a few layers, inserting a sheet of tulle (or garden netting) then printing a few more layers so that the fabric is "encased" by each scale.

<a href="140_scales_printing.jpg">140_scales_printing.jpg</a>

The 3D printer can print roughly a "panel" of 5x6 scales at a time.
Each panel starts with 3 layers of transparent filament then switches to 2-4 layers
of blue filament to get scales that are different levels of transparent.


Loren placing and gluing down the 18 individual panels of 3d printed scale

<a href="170_scales_done.jpg">170_scales_done.jpg</a>
<a href="179_scales_done.jpg">179_scales_done.jpg</a>
<a href="180_final_testing.jpg">180_final_testing.jpg</a>

Inside the fish is a **Raspberry Pi** + a custom PCB with an ESP32.
Zhigalka designed the PCB for a previous LED light projects.
The RPi runs circuitpython (shout out to Adafruit!) and uses an mpr121 for the touch sensors on the music scales

<a href="100_electronics_1.jpg">100_electronics_1.jpg</a>

Tweaking the touch sensors and preparing for final assemble

<a href="204_testing_electronics.jpg">204_testing_electronics.jpg</a>
<a href="205_testing_LED_code.jpg">205_testing_LED_code.jpg</a>

The final two days were a sprint to finish before the event and we didn't get time to capture the scales being glued down, the fish being stuffed with bubble wrap and polyfill, or us frantically setting up in the final moments of sunlight

<a href="200_tweaking.jpg">200_tweaking.jpg</a>
<a href="210_getting_close.jpg">210_getting_close.jpg</a>

Just an hour before the event we finished the project!

<a href="220_finished.jpg">220_finished.jpg</a>
<a href="240_celebration.jpg">240_celebration.jpg</a>
